---
title: Trying to synthesize learnings on life design
date: 2025-04-17
tags: post
layout: post-layout.njk
---

This is a brain dump about my learnings from the various books that I've read
or reread over the past couple of months.

## Life's task

There was a lot about learning, performance, expertise and decision making.
Also building habits and thinking. I want to explore what these learnings could
mean to me personally and how I could utilize them in everyday life to get
closer to my goals. It is also worth noting that happiness should play a large
role in all of this as well. I think that when focusing too much on the
performance aspect of it all, happiness and what is really important in life
falls to the wayside. This is something that Cal Newport nicely reflects in his
book Deep Work. I think he says something like working is actually more
enjoyable than leisure time. He urges us to figure out what the most important
things in ones life are. Robert Greene in his book Mastery calls this "finding
the life's task".

I've thought that for me that would be learning. Figuring out how to use the
brain in such a way as to be able to adapt and learn new things fast.

## Focus - Ignore most of the things 

I wonder how good of a goal that is. Or what it means. I'm thinking there is so
much knowledge and skill in the world, one person can only master so much of
it. There simply is not the time to master everything. So maybe the question to
be asked before minding the learning is to wonder about what one should focus
on. And also what one can discard and ignore. This seems to be a very important
skill today, to be able to just ignore things.

The reason I started this journal entry was to get my head straight and get in
the mood for writing the learnings from the books mentioned before. I had just
eaten dinner and while doing that I was on the phone checking GitHub
repositories. I saw AutoGPT and going through that brought me to stagehand and
that brought me to browserbase. These are tools for automating browsers using
AI. With browserbase one can run 1000s of browsers and run all kinds of tasks.
I guess one could use them for scraping, testing information gathering (that's
scraping i guess) and for automating tasks of all kinds. The tool leverages
playwright to run tasks in the browser.

## Comparing to others

When looking at that kind of stuff and also at the profiles of maintainers of
some of these projects I can't help but think that I am hopelessly incapable in
comparison. But then they focused on something else. And they did so for long
enough for me to see them do it. I guess it comes down focus and time. 

## Building expertise over time

When someone starts programming at age 10 and stays at it that person will have
double the amount of experience than I do if I start at twenty and our paths
cross when we are both 30. It would in fact be surprising if the person would
not be twice as good as I am. And I guess when comparing something as closely
defined as that, programming in a specific domain like web development, then
one can start focusing on learning and strategies. But before that it's just a
matter of time and focus. So that's the big thing.

## Diminishing returns

Now I am wondering how much value one can get from learning to do web
development for ten years. There's something like diminishing returns. When I
get to a good enough level, say in the first two to three years I should
probably step up the game and look for something else to learn. Web development
is a nice skill to have but in ten years time will it really still be that
important? I guess the question here is what to focus on when learning
something new.

## Categorizing

So my thoughts so far bring me to a categorization that I'd like to make. The
number one thing that we should focus on is our life. This means we
have a resource that is exhaustible and should be valued above all else: time. 
After subtracting time needed for sleep and other necessities we are left with
the time during which we are free to choose what to do.

## Quality Time

This is already a large topic which could be discussed in great detail. One
thing that comes to mind is energy. This is something that we have some control
over. We might have a lot of time at our disposal but if we are tired or not
functioning at our best this time cannot be optimally utilized. This means
we need to take care of sleep, exercise and nutrition as well as mental health.

Let's not focus on that right now and consider it established that we have
energy. Now to the time. In many places in today's world we have the luxury of
great agency over our time. We rarely truly need to work more than 40 hours a
week to make a living. In many cases we can even work less than that. This is a
choice we can make. This leaves us with ample time and hopefully enough energy
to pursue what we deem worth pursuing. We can optimize here and think about
aligning our working time with the things that we want to do. This is an ideal
state that we should strive for. In my case, working as a software developer
has significant overlap with the things that I want to do. Thus I have a great
advantage over someone who has to work 40 hours in a field which does not bring
him closer to his goals.

## What to do with the time

Now that we have thought about time and it's allocation, we can start thinking
about what to do with it. So this is about the What. And here we can think
about what is really important to us. This is about life's questions, life's task
and the most important things in life. The things that are easy to agree on are
health, family and human connection. Next up is purpose. This is a bit more
tricky to think about and i guess highly individual. Going for myself I think
that learning is a big part of my purpose. I gain satisfaction from reading
about ideas, thinking about them and trying to efficiently connect them to
things I know. This has appeal to me because I feel like it is such a
bottomless well. It's also not expensive to do and can be done any time. I
guess it's also easy. This will probably be a part worth thinking about. We
tend to gravitate toward preserving energy and therefore doing easy things.

## Questioning Life's Task

To move on let's try to go deeper into the What. I've established that I enjoy
learning. But maybe let's in fact take a step back and think about that. Why
learning? What benefit does it bring me and others in the world? To go back to
very basic things. I work my job and am therefore able to make a living. I can
pay for food, shelter and clothing. I could also buy some other stuff but that
is not what interests me. Learning would allow me to get better at my job and
thus make more money eventually. But that doesn't seem like a satisfactory
reason either. So here's a junction where a strategy from deeper down this
categorization tree can come in handy: the five whys. 

Why do I want to learn? To learn more about the world. Why do I want to learn
more about the world? To be respected and thought of as smart. Why do I want to
be respected and thought of as smart? Because I want to be liked. Why do I want
to be liked? Because I need the support of other to survive. Why do I need the
support of other to survive? Because I am utterly incapable of surviving on my
own. Why is that so? Because I grew up in a world which everything is
interconnected and splintered. 
Very interesting exercise. Ok so let's analyze that.

I like learning because I want to survive. But also because I want to be loved.
Now I could discuss whether learning about the world is the best way to be
loved. There are likely many other factors that play a larger role in being
loved, so I should definitely make sure to invest time in those. For the other
topic of making money e.g. surviving: We are made to believe that we need to be
highly skilled in order to make a living. But I guess we would be able to get
by without being a master in our field. I'm thinking that we gain a lot of
enjoyment from being so good at what we do that others look to us for advice
and help. 

So this might have something to do with having a decent place in society. From
what I read I learned that humans do set up hierarchies between people and it
is beneficial to secure a decent place in those hierarchies.

### Hierarchies

Let's first look at the global hierarchy, our place in society as whole. I
think here the currency is money. The chef at the restaurant neither cares nor
knows anything about my relationships or skill. He cares about whether I pay
the meal and nothing else. Same goes for the guy that made my bicycle. I never
met the person and he doesn't care about my existence. Yet he spent his
valuable time and energy to build me a bicycle. 

## Two currencies

There's different playing fields which we play on in our life's. We should be
mindful of which playing fields we spend most of our energy on. So what playing
fields do I spend my time on? There's my job which I need to thrive financially
and secure a good position in the social hierarchy. Then there's my 
personal life with my partner and around family and friends.

How can we gauge our positions in these hierarchies, or our rank in the roster 
of the teams that play on these fields?

At work I might get by with being a mediocre programmer. But it's possible that
there's more satisfaction to be had when being good, thereby gaining respect and 
getting the feeling of being a valued member of the team.

In personal life, what counts is our relationships. The love and time we 
give to others and the depth of our connections.
Now it seems obvious that while the job is important to get by in life, it is
much less elementary to happiness and a fulfilled life than the personal sphere.

To summarize, there's multiple spheres that are largely disjoint. A global one,
where money allows me to buy other peoples time and attention. And a local one
where money is meaningless and personal connection is the most important
currency. 

Ok so let's converge again on the topic that I set out to discuss. We have so
far discussed time, energy and the What. Now let's think about the How while
keeping in mind the above, namely that consistency / focus and time are likely
to be essential.

## Identity based change

### Incoherent mumbling

I think the How is the part that most of the books I read focus on. At the
beginning is the goal to improve. For this section we can ignore what we'd like
to improve on. James Clear has a insightful framework that might be useful
here. We tend to look at goals and outcomes and work back from those to derive
processes to be followed, hoping that performing those actions will make us
become who we want to be. He suggests to flip that and start by changing the
identity. This is probably something like positive affirmations. Saying I am an
intelligent and thoughtful person rather than working from the goal of being
perceived as smart and coming up with a plan to get there. When we say we are
who we want to be it might be easier to align our actions with who we tell
ourselves we are.

Anders Ericsson I think has a different approach. He says that the actions we
perform change who we are.

Nisbett has something in common with Clear: they both realize that one should
make the desired output as easy as possible. Nisbett talks about making the
desired action the default action. Clear says to reduce the hurdles that one
faces. Shane Parrish also advises to tilt the playing field so
that the desired action becomes the easiest. The same works the other way
around: To make it harder to do things that are not desired.

## Breaking it down to the day

We are now on the micro level. And arguably, once we have identified the big
theme this is all that matters. The actions we do in a day. Things appear to
become laughably easy once we break it down to the atomic units of our life,
the day. Once we know what to do, we can schedule our time to make sure we do
it. Cal Newport introduced me to the concept of time blocking. This aims to
make sure we are aware of what we are doing at any given point in time. The
point is not so much to plan our days but to raise the awareness of what we are
spending our time on. We often find ourselves in autopilot mode. Time blocking
helps us to notice that and allocate our time better to align more closely with
what we want to do.

## Categorizing tools

### handing off to the subconscious

I'm struggling with the categorization of these different topics. To give 
my subconscious a shot at handling this I will provide a rough sketch of the 
categories I think are useful for managing ones life.

- the macro: what to do with our time / purpose / life's goal
  - Some tools for reasoning fall into this category. 
  - Probably the five whys,
  - mind mapping
  - exploration tools,
  - brainstorming 
  - thinking hats, etc.
  - manifestations
- the meso: (ChatGPT came up with that) the systems we put in place to
  achieve our goals
  - who we are, our identity
  - our environment
  - the people we surround ourselves with
  - our beliefs
  - peak: anything is possible
  - Parrish: camera team
  - Life's CEOs
- the micro: the actions we take in our day to day life
  - time blocking
  - planning
  - scheduling
  - cost benefit analysis
  - opportunity costs
  - statistical thinking
  - will this make life for my future self easier? (Parrish)
- the atomic: the specific actions we schedule into our day
  - our thoughts
  - decision making
  - focus
  - deliberation
  - fallacies
  - mnemonics
  - spaced repetition
  - Ultralearning
  - happiness
  - expectations

## The disorganized Toolbox

What I have right now is a stacked toolbox but it's spread out over a bunch of
books which I have stored across different locations all over the place. And I
have no idea where and when I should apply them or even when to be aware of
them. So what I need is to organize them in a way that allows me to more easily
access them. Then I need to practice by actually applying them to my life.

Let's see what categorizations might work. The draft I made above is to make
the separation along time scales.

## Atomic actions

I guess what could be helpful is to realize that absolutely everything breaks
down to an atomic action at the end. The thing that changes is the time horizon
of the action. For example when deciding about whether to have kids or not that
is an atomic action of sitting down and weighing pros and cons, applying
different thinking methods and so on. The same goes for the action of learning
about the latest AWS service. Both are atomic actions that are performed. The
difference is the time horizon. The AWS Service might be no longer relevant a
couple months from now. The kids on the other hand will be around for a long
time. 

Here I am comparing a decision (having kids) with a task (learning about some
AWS service). I wonder whether there's a real difference or if making a
decision also breaks down to tasks, like doing a cost benefit analysis.
For the sake of simplicity let's assume that there is no difference.

## Allocating time to big picture thinking and execution

So perhaps the categorization of actions by their long term significance is
valid. How does this help me in my day to day life? Let's consider our limited
resource again: time. When everything comes down to us doing some atomic action
we might say that once we have the general direction of our life roughly
figured out we can focus on the actions that will get us there rather than
spending time ruminating and questioning our plans. We can then simply set
ourselves an event in the calendar maybe twice a year to then deliberately
check the high level picture of where we're going and whether we need to adjust
course.

So to summarize: think hard about who you want to be and where you want to go.
Then decide and execute. Only check the course at predefined intervals to make
the most the time.

## Categorizing Decisions 

A nice visualization here can be lent from Shane Parrish. He categorizes
decisions along two dimensions. Their long term impact and their reversibility.
This might be a tool which we can utilize in the big picture phase, so when
initially setting out to determine the course to take and on those planned
occasions when the course is reviewed. Or of course when big decisions just
jump up at you out of nowhere. To illustrate: we have a diagram divided into
four squares. In the square at the bottom left we have decisions which are
neither consequential nor hard to reverse. So deciding what to eat tonight
might fall into this category. Above, in the top left quadrant we have
decisions which are hard to reverse but inconsequential. Maybe that's getting a
tattoo on your butt cheek. On the bottom right there's the quadrant with
decisions that are easy to reverse but consequential. Maybe that's committing
to a savings plan. You can always just stop saving but committing might make
the difference between being Ok or rich at retirement time. Then the quadrant
at top right. Here's the things like taking a new job in a different place,
buying a house, getting married, and at the very top right there's having kids.

Parrish suggests that the amount of time we spend deliberating before 
making a decision should be guided by the position in this diagram.

Ok so now let's say we have a basic framework for allocating our time. Now we
can think about how to best execute our atomic actions to get to our goals.

## Getting ourselves to do the things

One thing to note is, that doing what needs to be done to get where we want to
be might not be fun. There might be a million other things that we could busy
our minds with, like watching TV. This is a good segue into the topic of
motivation. My understanding is that motivation is more or less useless.
Something along the lines of motivation is willpower. Willpower is an
exhaustible resource. If we have to expend energy to convince ourselves to do
something each time we do it we aren't going to last long. 

That's why we need systems that make us do what we need to do automatically and
stop us from doing what we shouldn't be doing. A prerequisite here is that we
know what each is, but let's assume that's been figured out. 

## Stopping undesired behavior

We'll start with preventing us doing stuff we shouldn't do. I feel like that's
easier. Say we want to stop eating chocolate. Rather then resisting going to
the drawer and getting us a sweet, we can sidestep the willpower issue by
simply not buying sweets at the supermarket. Not buying the stuff when we're at
the supermarket costs us a fraction of the willpower than constantly resisting
the chocolate that's right next to us in the drawer.
We're making it harder for us to perform the undesired behavior.
Another tool is to change your words. I think this is extremely powerful and 
simple. Instead of saying "I'm not eating chocolate this month", you could say 
"I'm don't like sweets". Parrish has made the experience that when 
relating your resolutions to others it helps to frame them as rules. So instead 
of saying "I'm trying not to drink" say "I don't drink as a rule".

## Motivation / Incentives

Also note that punishments and rewards are less efficient than we might think.
What's more helpful apart from designing your system to induce the desired
behavior is to make use of what other are doing. We are social animals and like
to be conformist. Find a group of people who's consistently doing what you want
to be doing and identify yourself as part of that group. I wouldn't dream of
spending time programming in my free time if I didn't feel like I'm somehow
associated to the people I see contributing to open source projects on GitHub
and racking up amazing commit stats.

The listing of these ideas and tools is rather haphazard. I'll need to
categorize them as well. The overall category of the above is something like 
coercion, motivation, habitualizations
